---
layout: post
title:  "My background"
date:   2016-01-03 15:02:43
categories: blog
---

# Summary
I have been employed as a Clinical Bioinformatician for the [North East Thames Regional Genetics Service](http://www.labs.gosh.nhs.uk/laboratory-services/genetics) since October 2012. Prior to this I undertook a 4 year, Wellcome Trust funded PhD in Molecular, Genetic and Lifecourse Epidemiology at the [University of Bristol](http://www.bristol.ac.uk/mgl-epidemiology/people/chris-boustred/) and an undergraduate degree in Biotechnology at Cardiff University.

# Cardiff & Exeter: 2004 - 2008
My undergraduate training at Cardiff consisted of a first year training in basic biology before specialising in biotechnology modules with a preference for modules related to human genetics. In the third year of my degree I opted to take a Professional Training Year (PTY). I worked as a Genetic Technologist in the Molecular Genetics Laboratory at the Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital. During the PTY I gained considerable practical experience in molecular biology techniques such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), gel electrophoresis and Sanger sequencing. I was part of a team of Genetic Technologists and Clinical Scientists delivering a diagnostic molecular genetic testing for service specialising in rare monogenic forms of diabetes; I was responsible for operating the high-throughput Sanger sequencing. During this time I gained experience of how NHS molecular genetics services operate and the important work they do for patients and their families. Furthermore, during this time I was able to contribute to a number of research articles and was involved in the ongoing research at the Peninsular Medical School where the polygenic research team were investigating the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes using the then ground breaking, genome-wide association study (GWAS) techniques.

# Bristol: 2008 - 2012
My time in Exeter inspired me to further my knowledge and experience of human genetics and the aetiology of disease. I successfully applied for a Wellcome Trust funded 4 year PhD in the School of Community Medicine at the University of Bristol. The first year consisted of three 10 week mini-projects where I gained a breadth of experience in different research areas including lab based molecular genetics, GWAS and statistics. For the next 3 years I undertook a project investigating molecular genetic techniques for assaying rare genetic variant in large populations, including High Resolution Melt Curve Analysis (HRMCA), meltMadge, SNP genotyping, PCR  and hybridisation based Next Generation DNA sequencing (NGS) and whole genome sequencing. I undertook a number of wet- and dry- experiments which generated considerable volumes of data which required downstream analysis; this is where I first developed my bioinformatic and coding skills including BASH (Linux) and Python scripting.

# GOSH & ICH: 2012 - present
In October 2012, after completing my PhD, I applied for a job as a Clinical Bioinformatician in the North East Thames Regional Genetics Laboratory at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (GOSH). Similar to the laboratory in Exeter, the GOSH laboratory is part of the UK Genetic Testing Network (UKGTN), it is accredited to deliver diagnostic genetic testing for patients and families in the North East Thames catchment area. When I started, the laboratory had recently purchased an Illumina MiSeq NGS machine which was beginning to be used for targeted gene panel experiments. There was limited bioinformatics infrastructure or pipeline to support the NGS data analysis. Using the experience I gained during my PhD I procured both the computing hardware suitable for bioinformatic analysis and a secure cloud storage solution. I then implemented a bioinformatics pipeline for NGS data analysis.The pipeline has been in operation since early 2013 and all of the in-service UKAS accredited NGS gene panels are analysed through it. As well as implementing the gene panel pipeline with collaborators from UCL I implemented and validated an NGS data analysis pipeline for Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) for trisomies as part of the RAPID research project (http://www.rapid.nhs.uk/). A number of peer reviewed research articles have been published as a result of this work. More recently, the laboratory has carried out  Clinical Exome sequencing for which the analysis required an updated pipeline with the ability to analyse virtual gene panels. I have developed and validated a new data processing pipeline and managed a colleague who has implemented a database and web app for viewing the results. During my time as GOSH Health Education England (HEE) introduced the STP for Clincal Bioinformatics with specialism in Genomics. I was involved finalising the curriculum and writing the associated assessments (DOPs and OSFAs) and am responsible for the training and line management of bioinformatics STPs in the department.

# Other
Other achievements whilst at GOSH include being invited to participate with the Government Advisory Board (GAB) task and finish group for bioinformatics education. As a group we produced a document outlining the bioinformatics training requirements related to the introduction of genomic technologies across the health and care system ( http://bit.ly/1jfR1II ). One of the recommendations from this document was the further higher specialist training (HSST) for clinical bioinformatics and subsequently I have been involved in drafting a HSST curriculum with HEE. I am a member of the United Kingdom National External Quality Assessment Service (UK NEQAS) and the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network (EMQN) scientific advisory group (SAG) which is currently piloting External Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes for NGS data analysis. I have collaborated on numerous research projects with colleagues at the Institute of Child Health (ICH) and am teaching on the Applied Medical Sciences degree run by UCL

[jekyll]:      http://jekyllrb.com
[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-help]: https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll-help
